Newfoundland & Labrador
BEVERAGE DISTRIBUTOR GUIDE




                    1
CONTENTS

The following handbook is presented for general information. The contents in this
Document are subject to change and do not supersede the authority or provisions of the
Newfoundland and Labrador Waste Management Regulations. In the event of any
Discrepancy or inconsistency between the information in this document and the
Waste Management Regulations, the regulations will prevail.



1.    Definitions .............................................................................................................. 3
2.    Program Overview ................................................................................................. 5
3.    Distributor’s Obligations ........................................................................................ 6
4.    Registration ............................................................................................................ 7
5.    Deposit-Bearing Beverage Containers ................................................................... 8
6.    Beverage Containers Not Included in the Program ............................................. 10
7.    Reporting and Remitting ...................................................................................... 13
8.    Accountability and Enforcement ......................................................................... 15
9.    Notification of Sale or Closure of Business .......................................................... 16
10.   Contact MMSB ..................................................................................................... 17
11.   Website Addresses .............................................................................................. 18
12.   APPENDIX A: Examples of Deposit-Bearing Containers ....................................... 19
13.   APPENDIX B: Examples of Non-Program Containers............................................ 23




                                                                      2
1. DEFINITIONS
ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR
Alcoholic liquor as defined in the Liquor Corporation Act but does not include beer

BEER
Beer as defined in the Liquor Corporation Act

BEVERAGE
A ready-to-serve liquid intended for human consumption, including a carbonated or non-carbonated soft
drink; bottled water, naturally or artificially carbonated; a fruit juice or fruit drink; a vegetable juice; beer;
and alcoholic liquor.

Beverage does not include milk, an infant formula, or all medicinal nutritional supplements formulated for
special dietary needs.

BEVERAGE CONTAINER
A container that contains or has contained a beverage delivered sealed to a retailer where the container
is made of glass, steel, aluminum, plastic, aseptic packaging, or other recyclable material.

Beverage container does not include a plastic cup, Styrofoam cup or other unsealed container sold to a
service industry for on-site consumption, or a container that is refillable, holds more than 5 litres,
contains or has contained a premixed fountain beverage, or contains or has contained a concentrated
product.

DEPOSIT
An amount of money paid to the Distributor or retailer by the purchaser of a beverage in a beverage
container;

DEPOT
A place where used beverage containers are collected;

DEPOT OPERATOR
A person who owns, manages or operates a depot;




                                                        3
1. DEFINITIONS (Continued)

DISTRIBUTOR
A person who manufactures a beverage in the province, by wholesale or other means, sells a beverage in
a beverage container to a retailer, bottles a beverage in a beverage container for sale in the province.

In addition, where a retailer manufactures a beverage in the province; bottles a beverage in a beverage
container in the province; or imports a beverage in a beverage container into the province, and sells the
beverage on its premises, the retailer shall be considered to be a Distributor.

LABEL
Includes a sticker, word or marking on a beverage container or the lid, cap or cover of a beverage
container which identifies the contents;

MEDICINAL NUTRITIONAL SUPPLEMENTS FORMULATED FOR SPECIAL DIETARY NEEDS
See section 6

MILK AND MILK PRODUCT ALTERNATIVES
See section 6

REFILLABLE
A beverage container that can be returned to a Distributor for reuse as a beverage container where the
Distributor has established a system for the collection of the container that has been approved by MMSB
or is required under Liquor Licensing Regulations of Newfoundland and Labrador.

REFUND
The amount paid for the delivery of a beverage container to a depot.

RETAILER
A person who sells a beverage in a beverage container for consumption on or off its premises and
includes a person who sells by a coin-operated vending machine.




                                                     4
2. PROGRAM OVERVIEW

The used beverage container deposit-refund program (program) was established in 1997, in accordance
with the Newfoundland and Labrador Waste Management Regulations. These regulations require
beverage Distributors or Retailers to remit a recycling deposit on all ready-to-serve beverage containers
sold in Newfoundland and Labrador.

The Multi-Materials Stewardship Board (MMSB) operates the deposit-refund program, including the
collection and transportation of used beverage containers as well as overseeing program public education
and operations of a network of licensed and independently owned and operated Green Depots.

MULTI-MATERIALS STEWARDSHIP BOARD
Established in 1996, MMSB is a Crown agency of the Government of Newfoundland and Labrador
reporting to the Minister of Municipal Affairs and Environment.

MMSB’s mandate is derived from the Environmental Protection Act and accompanying Waste
Management Regulations. MMSB works in partnership with multiple stakeholders to support and
promote sustainable waste management practices as a means of helping ensure a clean and healthy
environment throughout Newfoundland and Labrador.

Waste diversion programs and services currently provided by MMSB include: Used Beverage Container
Recycling Program; Used Tire Management Program; Residential Backyard Composting Program;
Extended Producer Responsibility planning and oversight; waste management research and diversion
measurement; and public education planning, outreach and marketing.




                                                     5
3. DISTRIBUTOR OBLIGATIONS

The program requires that all Distributors in the province:
 1. Register with MMSB (see section 4);
 2. Report to MMSB the number of all deposit-bearing beverage containers sold in Newfoundland and
    Labrador on a monthly basis (as per section 5); and
 3. Remit the applicable deposits (as per section 5).




        MMSB’S MANDATE IS DERIVED
        FROM THE ENVIRONMENTAL
        PROTECTION ACT AND
        ACCOMPANYING WASTE
        MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS




                                                 6
4. REGISTRATION
All new Distributors in the province must submit a completed registration form to MMSB.
 • Download an electronic copy of the registration form from mmsb.nl.ca.
 • Email a MMSB Compliance Auditor at auditor@mmsb.nl.ca or call toll-free at 1 (800) 901-MMSB
     (6672) to receive a hardcopy of the registration form.

MMSB will issue a registration number that must be included on monthly remittance forms.

Note: Distributors currently registered with the program are required to notify MMSB of any changes
to their registration information by completing the applicable fields on the program registration form
and resubmitting the updated information to MMSB.

STEWARDSHIP AGREEMENT
All registered Distributors are required to submit a signed copy of the program Stewardship Agreement
which outlines requirements as per the Waste Management Regulations. A signed copy can be returned
electronically to auditor@mmsb.nl.ca or by mail to:

Multi-Materials Stewardship Board (MMSB)
P.O. Box 8131, Station A
St. John’s, NL A1B 3M9

LIST OF DISTRIBUTORS
MMSB publishes a list of all Distributors online at mmsb.nl.ca. The published list eliminates the
uncertainty of whether the deposit should or should not be remitted to MMSB by a Retailer who is also a
Distributor. The list will be updated on the first business day of each month to reflect any changes.




                                                   7
5. DEPOSIT-BEARING BEVERAGE CONTAINERS
All non-refillable, ready-to-serve beverage containers five litres or less are included in the program –
exemptions apply (see section 6). An 8 or 20 cent deposit will apply to each beverage container,
depending on the size and type of container and whether it is used for an alcoholic or a non-alcoholic
beverage (see the Deposit-Bearing Beverage Container chart below).

Each beverage container that qualifies as deposit-bearing is deemed registered under the program and
must include a return for refund message. Variations of the wording are acceptable as long as the
concept of a refund (e.g. Return for Refund; Refundable; Return for refund where applicable; etc.) is
evident and that the Mobius Loop symbol or the word “Recyclable” appears on the label. The important
point is the content of the message and that it is readily visible, and it must be on the container when it is
empty.

If a Distributor requires clarification about whether a beverage container is deposit-bearing or not,
contact MMSB at inquiries@mmsb.nl.ca in writing via email and provide a digital copy of the product
label for review. MMSB will provide written confirmation on whether or not a deposit applies and the
amount.




                                                                             THE IMPORTANT POINT IS THE
                                                                             CONTENT OF THE MESSAGE
                                                                             AND THAT IT IS READILY
                                                                             VISIBLE, AND IT MUST BE ON
                                                                             THE CONTAINER WHEN IT IS
                                                                             EMPTY




                                                      8
DEPOSIT-BEARING BEVERAGE CONTAINERS


                         ALUMINUM CANS                    DEPOSIT   REFUND

                         Non-Alcoholic Beverages          $0.08     $0.05

                         Beer                             $0.08     $0.05

                         Wine and Spirits                 $0.08     $0.05

                         OTHER METAL CONTAINERS           DEPOSIT   REFUND

                         Non-Alcoholic Beverages          $0.08     $0.05

                         Beer (non-refillable)            $0.08     $0.05

                         CLEAR PLASTIC CONTAINERS         DEPOSIT   REFUND

                         Non-Alcoholic Beverages          $0.08     $0.05

                         50ml Miniature Liquor            $0.08     $0.05

                         Wine and Spirits                 $0.20     $0.10

                         OTHER PLASTIC CONTAINERS         DEPOSIT   REFUND

                         Non-Alcoholic Beverages          $0.08     $0.05

                         50ml Miniature Liquor            $0.08     $0.05

                         Wine and Spirits                 $0.20     $0.10

                         GLASS CONTAINERS                 DEPOSIT   REFUND

                         Non-Alcoholic Beverages          $0.08     $0.05

                         Beer (non-refillable)            $0.08     $0.05

                         50ml Miniature Liquor            $0.08     $0.05

                         Wine and Spirits                 $0.20     $0.10

                         TETRA AND GABLE TOP CONTAINERS   DEPOSIT   REFUND

                         Non-Alcoholic Beverages          $0.08     $0.05

                         Wine and Spirits                 $0.20     $0.10

                         OTHER CONTAINERS                 DEPOSIT   REFUND

                         Non-Alcoholic Beverage Pouches   $0.08     $0.05

                         Wine and Spirits Bag-in-a-box    $0.08     $0.05

                         Wine and Spirits Pouches         $0.08     $0.05




                                                 9
6. BEVERAGE CONTAINERS
NOT INCLUDED IN THE PROGRAM
The following products are not included in the program and a deposit does not apply.

•   Milk (see Definition A below)
•   Milk substitutes (see Definition A below)
•   Infant formula (as per the Canadian Food and Drug Regulations, Part B, Division 25.045)
•   Meal replacement beverages and formulated liquid diets (see Definition B below)
•   Concentrated beverages
•   Containers greater than 5 litres
•   Refillable containers that are collected and reused through a local Distributor program as approved
    by MMSB or as required under the Liquor Licensing Regulations of Newfoundland and Labrador.

OUT-OF-PROVINCE SALE
If a Distributor sells any beverage container out of province, the deposit does not apply. However, the
Distributor is required to retain documentation relating to the out-of-province sale to substantiate non-
remittance of the deposit.

A retailer that sells a deposit-bearing beverage container out of province must provide MMSB with proof
of shipment and sale, along with proof of payment of the deposit, in order to be reimbursed.




                                                    10
DEFINITION A
The Exclusion of Milk and Milk Product Alternatives from the Beverage Container Recycling Program.

1. The Waste Management Regulations under the Environmental Protection Act define a beverage as a
   ready-to-serve liquid intended for human consumption, including (i) a carbonated or non-carbonated
   soft drink, (ii) bottled water, naturally or artificially carbonated, (iii) a fruit juice or fruit drink, (iv) a
   vegetable juice, (v) beer, and (vi) alcoholic liquor, but does not include, (vii) milk, (viii) an infant
   formula, or (ix) all medicinal nutritional supplements formulated for special dietary needs.

2. For the purpose of administering the Used Beverage Container Recycling Program
   “milk” includes:

    a) “Milk” as defined under Part B, Division 08.003, 08.004, 08.005 and 08.016 of the Canadian Food
       and Drug Regulations. Includes whole, skim and part-skim white and flavoured milk.
    b) “Goat’s Milk” as defined under Part B, Division 08.028.1 of the Canadian Food and Drug
       Regulations.
    c) Milk product alternatives that are fortified plant-based beverages as defined under Part B,
       Division 01.500 of the Canadian Food and Drug Regulations.

3. A Distributor shall not charge a deposit on a ready-to-serve beverage that is milk, goat’s milk or a milk
   product alternative labelled as a fortified (insert name of plant e.g. soy, almond or oat) beverage* as
   per section 2 above.

*Any ready-to-serve milk product alternative labelled as both a fortified plant-based beverage and
not a source of protein is included in the Used Beverage Container Recycling Program and the
applicable deposit must be charged by the Distributor.




                                                        11
DEFINITION B
The Exclusion of Medicinal Nutritional Supplements Formulated for Special Dietary Needs from the
Beverage Container Recycling Program.

1. The Waste Management Regulations under the Environmental Protection Act define a beverage as a
   ready-to-serve liquid intended for human consumption, including (i) a carbonated or non-carbonated
   soft drink, (ii) bottled water, naturally or artificially carbonated, (iii) a fruit juice or fruit drink, (iv) a
   vegetable juice, (v) beer, and (vi) alcoholic liquor, but does not include, (vii) milk, (viii) an infant
   formula, or (ix) all medicinal nutritional supplements formulated for special dietary needs.

2. For the purposes of the administration of the Beverage Container Recycling Program “medicinal
    nutritional supplements formulated for special dietary needs” include:
   a) A “Formulated Liquid Diet” as defined under Part B, Division 24.100 of the Canadian Food and
       Drug Regulations.
   b) A “Meal Replacement” as defined under Part B, Division 24. 200 of the Canadian Food and Drug
       Regulations.
   c) Any beverage prescribed to a consumer by a physician licensed to practice medicine in the
       province of Newfoundland and Labrador by the College of Physicians and Surgeons.

A Distributor shall not charge a deposit on a beverage that is marketed as Formulated Liquid Diet by
having the words “Formulated Liquid Diet” on the label of the beverage.

A Distributor shall not charge a deposit on a beverage that is marketed as a Meal Replacement by having
the words “Meal Replacement” on the label of the beverage.

MMSB shall refund to a consumer the deposit paid on any beverage for which that consumer has
provided proof of a prescription for the consumption of that beverage by a physician licensed to practice
medicine in the province of Newfoundland and Labrador.




                                                       12
7. REPORTING AND REMITTING
A Distributor is required to report the sale of all deposit-bearing beverage containers in the province and
remit payment of the applicable deposits to MMSB on a monthly basis, at the end of the reporting period,
using the program remittance form.

•   Download an electronic copy of the program remittance forms (20 cent deposit form and 8 cent
    deposit form) mmsb.nl.ca.
•   Call a MMSB Compliance Auditor toll-free 1 (800) 901-MMSB (6672) or email auditor@mmsb.nl.ca to
    receive a hardcopy of the Used Beverage Container Recycling remittance form.

REPORTING
 • Please provide all information requested on the program remittance form to ensure proper account
    management.
 • It is necessary to report the number of ready-to-serve used beverage containers by category and the
    amount of the applicable deposits.
 • Distributors must keep records of the number and types of beverage containers sold each month
    and the total deposit.

MONTHLY DUE DATE
• Completed program remittance forms must be submitted every month – even if no used beverage
   containers were sold during the month.
• Remittance forms and payment of applicable deposits are due by the tenth (10th) day of the month
   following the reporting period.
• Completed forms can be submitted in hardcopy or electronic format. MMSB accepts payment
   through Electronic Funds Transfer (EFT) or cheque.



Email:                remittances@mmsb.nl.ca
Fax:                  709-753-0974
Mail/Delivery:        Multi-Materials Stewardship Board
                      P.O. Box 8131, Station A
                      St. John’s, NL A1B 3M9




                                                    13
7. REPORTING AND REMITTING (Continued)
HARMONIZED SALES TAX (HST)
HST applies to deposits of taxable ready-to-serve beverage containers. Distributors are responsible for
remitting HST to CRA on all applicable deposits.

RECORD KEEPING
Distributors must retain a copy of the sale of all deposit-bearing beverage containers and corresponding
remittance information for three years for program auditing purposes.

Note: Distributors are responsible for operating in accordance with CRA’s requirements for keeping
accounting and other financial information documents. Visit the Canada Revenue Agency website for
more information.




                                                    14
8. ACCOUNTABILITY AND ENFORCEMENT
MMSB is committed to ensuring a fair and level playing field for all program participants through a
continued focus on compliance with program guidelines.

COMPLIANCE
Compliance audits of Distributors registered with the program are conducted by MMSB and third-party
auditors to ensure that the sale of all ready-to-serve beverage containers is reported, applicable deposits
are remitted and that all Distributors are compliant with the Waste Management Regulations.

Records of each Distributor are audited to verify:
 • Deposits have been applied to the sale of all ready-to-serve beverage containers
    accepted through the program;
 • Deposits are reported and remitted; and,
 • All records from both Distributors and MMSB are accurate and consistent.

FAILURE TO REPORT AND REMIT
Failure to report and remit deposits may result in any or all of the following actions:
 • Audit of the Distributor;
 • Legal proceedings to collect amounts owed;
 • Application of a fine, in accordance with the Waste Management Regulations; and,
 • Cancellation of the Distributors registration and notification to provincial enforcement.




                                                    15
9. NOTIFICATION OF SALE OR CLOSURE OF BUSINESS
A Distributor is required to provide written notice to MMSB of the sale or closure of its business in order
to ensure its account is properly closed.

Note: Until MMSB receives written notice, a Distributor remains registered with the program and is
obligated to meet requirements under the Waste Management Regulations. Written notices can be
submitted electronically or in hardcopy:

Email:                 auditor@mmsb.nl.ca
Fax:                   709-753-0974
Mail/Delivery:         Compliance Auditor
                       P.O. Box 8131, Station A
                       St. John’s, NL A1B 3M9




                                                     16
10. CONTACT MMSB
PROGRAM REGISTRATION
Email: auditor@mmsb.nl.ca

REPORTING AND REMITTING
Email: remittances@mmsb.nl.ca

PROGRAM POLICY – PRODUCTS INCLUDED AND EXCLUDED
Email: inquiries@mmsb.nl.ca

MAILING ADDRESS
Multi-Materials Stewardship Board (MMSB)
P.O. Box 8131, Station A
St. John’s, NL A1B 3M9
TELEPHONE
Toll Free: 1 (800) 901-MMSB (6672)




                                           17
11. Website Addresses
Newfoundland and Labrador Environmental Protection Act and Waste Management Regulations
http://www.assembly.nl.ca/legislation/sr/statutes/e14-2.htm

Multi-Materials Stewardship Board (MMSB)
http://mmsb.nl.ca

Canadian Food and Drug Act
http://laws-lois.justice.gc.ca/eng/acts/F-27/

Canadian Food and Drug Regulations
http://laws-lois.justice.gc.ca/eng/regulations/C.R.C.,_c._870/index.html

Canada Revenue Agency
http://www.cra-arc.gc.ca




                                                    18
APPENDIX A
EXAMPLES OF DEPOSIT-BEARING CONTAINERS
The following containers do not qualify for exemption from the program
based on the definitions of Milk and Milk Product Alternatives or Medicinal
Nutritional Supplements Formulated for Special Dietary Needs




                                    19
DEPOSIT




 Deposit – Ready-to-Serve Beverage
 These products are not labelled as Milk or Milk product alternatives that are
 fortified plant-based beverages.




                                       20
DEPOSIT




 Deposit – Ready-to-Serve Beverage
 This product is not labelled as a formulated liquid diet or infant formula.
 NOTE: MMSB shall refund to a consumer the deposit paid on any beverage
 for which that consumer has provided proof of a prescription for the
 consumption of that beverage by a physician licensed to practice medicine in
 the province of Newfoundland and Labrador.




                                      21
DEPOSIT




  Deposit – Ready-to-Serve Beverage
  These products are a ready-to-serve milk product alternatives labelled as
  both a fortified plant-based beverage and not a source of protein.




                                      22
APPENDIX B
EXAMPLES OF NON-PROGRAM CONTAINERS
The following containers qualify for exemption from the program based on the
definitions of Milk and Milk Product Alternatives or Medicinal Nutritional
Supplements Formulated for Special Dietary Needs




                                   23
NO DEPOSIT




 No Deposit – Milk
 These products are “Milk” as defined under Part B, Division 08.003, 08.004,
 08.005 and 08.016 of the Canadian Food and Drug Regulations. Includes
 whole, skim and part-skim white and flavoured milk.




                                      24
NO DEPOSIT




 No Deposit – Milk Product Alternative Labelled as a Fortified
 These products are Milk product alternatives that are fortified plant-based
 beverages as defined under Part B, Division 01.500 of the Canadian Food and
 Drug Regulations.




                                     25
NO DEPOSIT




 No Deposit – Meal Replacement
 This product is a “Meal Replacement” as defined under Part B, Division 24.
 200 of the Canadian Food and Drug Regulations.




                                      26
